>> Hello.
I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill.
And I want to welcome you
to "Living in Balance."
We are in our series of the
great religions of the world.
And we do have the Swami
Yogeshwarananda with us today
who has a foundation
in Hinduism,
but also has studied all of the
great religions of the world.
And I've asked him to
share with you nirvana.
So come join us, "Living
in Balance on Shakti-Hill."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Every year or two, we
are treated with a visit
from the Swami Yogeshwarananda.
He does come to our area by
way of, this time, Switzerland
and then California.
And so we are very honored
to have him with us.
Welcome, Swami.
>> Oh, thank you very much.
>> I have asked if you would
share today on the subject
of nirvana.
And you said, well,
with your background
and having studied both
Buddhism and the Hinduism,
which approach what I like.
And I said, tell us
both, how they are alike
and how they are different,
and what is nirvana?
>> Well, nirvana means a
state of enlightenment.
You get to your own blessing
state of existence in which you
experience a state of wonderful
beingness, which is so distinct
and cut away from our normal,
human empirical existence
in the world.
That's a state wherein you
experience total bliss wherein
you get to know everything.
You're all-knowing.
And you are absolute
in your existence.
When I use the word
absolute, it means
that you are self complete
in every sense of the term.
Swami, are we all
striving toward nirvana?
Are some people
aware that they are?
Is that a goal of
the human condition?
>> Yes that is the final
goal and the final state.
The only difference
is, most of us
are going through
it unconsciously,
while a few who have
understood the significance
of human existence tend
to proceed towards it
more consciously and
want to accelerate
their movement towards it.
>> Well, in talking with someone
about the basics of Hinduism,
they were explaining that some
people are bad and act badly.
Some people are good and
their behavior is good.
And then there is the devoted.
Now if you were to look
at people like that,
is it the devoted that
are aware that they
are on this journey
toward enlightenment?
>> Not necessarily.
Of course, you get
a wide spectrum
in the human character.
But the ones who are
proceeding towards nirvana
are the ones who are
more truth conscious
or who are devoted
with all their heart
and being in trying
to experience
the state of nirvana, or
the enlightened state.
You may call it the
godly state of beingness.
>> Now when we have talked
about nirvana before,
some people have explained
it, there are no real lows,
there are no real highs.
It is a middle road.
Now, where is the definition of
that being at that middle road?
You make it sound
absolutely blissful.
>> Yes, in fact, the way
towards it is the middle path.
Lord Buddha very beautifully
termed it as the middle path.
And that is a psychological
middle path, not
the physical middle part.
But the psychological
state wherein
you maintain your balance.
So you're leading a very
balanced and serene way
of living, which will
eventually lead you to nirvana.
>> So our show could be,
instead of living in balance,
we could just be nirvana.
>> Yes, that is right.
So that's like the ultimate
goal of the living in balance
would be defined or
explained as nirvana.
>> Yes, in fact he's very
intriguing to know that that is
one of the definitions given
in the "Bhagavad Gita" 2,
the middle path, wherein it
mentions Samatvam Yoga Uchyate,
that means the state
of mental equipoise,
or the state of mental balance
with which one is living
one's life is the way
or the road to nirvana.
>> Do we sometimes
drift in and out of it?
Are we sometimes
experiencing it?
And then we go
back to the mundane
or we are still
learning our lessons?
What is that?
Is it a place that
you are always?
Or do you drift back and forth?
>> Well, at the moment, we
are not drifting into it.
But what we are doing
is that basically we
are from a human perspective
or human level of living,
at times we are balanced.
The human race is balanced.
Individuals are balanced.
And very often they
are imbalanced too.
But the whole key
or the whole idea
is that one should keep on
living our life in a very
balanced, serene, calm
manner so that eventually
and finally we would get into
that ultimate state of balance
and peace.
>> Would we stay here in
this plane, in this planet,
in this life if
we reach nirvana?
>> When you reach nirvana,
what happens is that the whole
universe collapses
and disappears.
And a intriguing
question arises.
If the whole universe
disappears, then where are we?
But the remarkable thing
is, the whole universe
is or exists in
space and time where
there is movement and change.
While the state of
nirvana is that which
is beyond space, wherein
there is no time,
and wherein there is no
movement, because it is full,
it is total, it is
absolute, beingness.
>> Now are you then, because
you have devoted yourself--
and let's tell, some people
have not met you before,
so we have to know your story.
I refer to you as the
Swami from Sri Lanka.
>> Yes
>> Yes, which used to be Ceylon.
>> Right.
>> So, Sri Lanka.
And from there, that's
where you were born,
but you really did
your spiritual work
in the Himalayas.
Tell us a little bit
about your journey
that brought you to this
understanding of nirvana.
>> Well, when I was young,
I was a seeker after truth,
what the truth of
life is all about.
And then, by God's grace, I
got into the spiritual life
and went over the Himalayas to
live the life of a hermit monk.
And during the
course of my life I
began to appreciate and
understand the purpose of life
and what the state of
nirvana is all about
and how to proceed towards that.
And that has been my life.
>> Well according
to your resume,
it was 25 years that you spent.
>> Oh, it's about 35 now.
>> 35 now.
And you actually did
then, as an ascetic,
you spent time in the cave.
You actually spent time in not
poverty, but without support,
except from the
generosity of the people.
Is that how the ascetic lives?
>> That's right in fact, the
support structure of the Indian
society is very congenial and
conducive to lead the life
of a hermit or an ascetic.
The society is very
supportive and recognizes
people who sought and to
lead a spiritual life.
So as a result of
it what happens
is that, who knows
out of 1,000 hermits
one could flower out into
a beautiful holy being
who has attained nirvana.
>> Uh-huh.
And so just in case,
the people then
are willing to support the
lifestyle of the monks.
>> That's right.
>> But what you've said is
that Hinduism is the basis
for your philosophy.
But why did you go beyond that?
What was it about you
as a seeker of the truth
that you wanted to know
the other great religions?
>> Well, we don't confine
ourselves to any particular
tradition.
We make access to the available
knowledge found in the world.
So therefore, it is only
right and proper that we
go into all traditions
from which one
could derive the maximum
input and knowledge
and understanding.
And the remarkable thing is that
what has been briefly mentioned
in one tradition, certain
aspects get better
explained in another tradition.
And what has been mentioned
in a third tradition, just
only merely being just given
a simple passing reference,
gets well-expounded
in another tradition.
So it is therefore very good
to go into all traditions
so that one could become
the richer for it.
>> Yes.
And so that was your approach.
>> In fact, I had no bias or
particular inclination towards
any particular religion.
I was not concerned of
religion, not in the least.
All that I was concerned was
to know what the truth of life
is all about.
So I broke the religious
barrier when I was young itself,
as I had no interest
in religion,
but only in God and
the truth of life.
>> Oh I see.
So with a religion
meaning a structured place
or with a religion with
certain dogmas, certain rules,
you were only looking
for what you considered
to be what was the truth.
>> What was the truth.
>> The wisdom.
>> That's right.
Because a religious
structure encompasses
many facts, many features,
its theological doctrines,
its ritualistic approach,
its belief system,
which may be relevant
or non-relevant,
and its varied practices, which
equally also may be relevant,
may not be, its
conventions and practices.
But what I was concerned of was
the truth it was bringing out,
the final truth of life.
>> Now the one book that were
mentioned first is a book that
then was an outgrowth of this
wisdom that you had gained,
and it is called "The
Yoga for Understanding."
>> Yes "The Yoga
of Understanding"
is an explanatory commentary
on a chapter of the "Bhagavad
Gita" wherein wisdom
knowledge is brought out.
Because the first thing
that usually a person,
a spiritual seeker
or a truth seeker
should seek for is
wisdom and knowledge.
>> I was going to ask you,
I know that you've spent all
those years in the
cave and so forth,
but might it be possible for
us to take a few shortcuts
to enlightenment, some
techniques that might help.
So if you will stay tuned,
we will be back with Swami
and some steps
toward enlightenment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If you are just joining
us, we are talking
with the Swami Yogeshwarananda.
He is philosopher
and he is author.
Three of his books
that we have we're
going to be talking about,
in addition to our techniques
toward enlightenment.
And of those three books
that we have mentioned
that he is the author of, he has
shared his wisdom in his life
as he has traveled the world.
And that is what he
determined was his role when
he left the Himalayas.
And how did you know
you were to write?
Was it just time was
that as the author?
>> Yes, in fact, each one
expresses his own nature.
So when the time has
come, you give expression
to what you understand
and what you know.
>> Yes.
And I had mentioned
the first book.
And that was what I
mentioned the title,
"The Yoga for Understanding."
And you said no, it is "The
Yoga of Understanding."
And you might even
have changed the title.
Tell us about that.
>> Yes, in fact,
understanding, yes,
it's a yoga of understanding.
One has to understand.
And order for the
understanding to transpire,
one requires wisdom knowledge.
So we could even say it's
a yoga of wisdom knowledge.
>> Yes.
And that's what you said
we must acquire first.
>> First.
>> So that is our homework then.
>> That's right.
In fact, once you have
the wisdom knowledge,
you would know where to
proceed and how to proceed.
And where you are and
what you are right now.
So after wisdom and knowledge,
then we move to the action.
>> That's right.
>> And one of the words
for action, is it karma?
>> Yes.
>> And people have a
misunderstanding too of karma.
If you were to define
that, again, for us,
and I've asked you
this before, karma is--
>> Karma is a very wide word.
We could say that it's a series
of life experiences and life
actions that we go through.
In life, it could
be said to be karma.
>> And when we use it in the
Western sense, we'll say, well,
that's your karma.
As you sow, so shall you reap.
So it's a result of
the action that you
take is what happens after.
>> Yes, it does.
But the laws which govern
the karmic effects on people
is far more complex than that.
>> Yes.
>> It's not merely an action
and reaction as it is popularly
said.
>> Yes, the cause and effect.
So that's how it's
used in the West,
but it's much wider than that.
>> It's more wider than that.
It's not only used in
the Western tradition,
but in the Asian tradition too.
But I believe it's some far
more complex than that, wherein
the entire human character
is brought out to be unfolded
in the scheme of living life.
And that which governs
and regulates them,
one of the factors is, of
course, the cause and effect.
But there is another factor
which is even more strong.
And that is each person's
psychological makeup,
which is also a very
great contributing factor
towards the unfoldment
of karmas in one's life.
>> Yes.
I remember I asked you.
And I was so pleased with
your explanation of dharma.
And I understood it then
to mean that our dharma was
our purpose, was our gift,
was our natural talent,
and what we were supposed to
express here in this lifetime.
>> That's right.
It's a law of being for each
individual as per his nature.
>> So it's the
individuals law of being.
>> Law of being, which is unique
to each person as each person
is so uniquely structured
in character differently.
>> So as they are trying to
find their purpose in life,
if they know what
their law of being is,
then personally then they
can fulfill that purpose.
>> Yes, in order to know
what their law being is,
first of all, they must
understand themselves.
So they have to psychoanalyze
and understand themselves.
>> Yes.
>> So the process
of psychoanalyzing
and understanding oneself is
wherein you become your own
guru.
And thereafter you
could guide yourself.
Because who is the person
who knows yourself best?
It's yourself.
>> Yes.
>> So who could guide
yourself the best?
It is you.
>> Tell me of the message
in one of your other books,
"Mind and the State of No-Mind--
the Journey into the Self."
Is that part of our
purpose being here?
Must we always learn to
know ourselves again?
>> That's right.
In fact, from the mind, we
get to the state of no-mind.
And the state of no-mind
and the state of nirvana,
wherein you transcend the mind,
transcend existing in a body,
and you go beyond the mind
>> Yes.
>> But we must start first.
>> So through the mind, you
proceed beyond the mind.
And when you get to the no-mind
state, you lose your mind.
>> And that's good.
>> That's very good.
>> And then we reach "The
Wholistic View of Life."
We look at life differently.
And that's another one of
your books, "The Wholistic
View of Life."
>> Yes, in fact, the wholistic
view means that in order
to have a perspective and
a vision of the whole,
which is the one truth.
So once you have a
vision of that one truth,
thereafter you could meditate
on it or the final truth
and experience it, realize
it within yourself.
So for that the vision of the
whole, vision of the one truth,
has to be discerned
as to what it is.
>> Now let us go back just
a moment to the nirvana,
because how would you express
from your studies of the great
world religions the difference
between the Hindu and Buddhist
perspective of nirvana?
>> Yes, in fact, a very
slight emphasis is given,
though it's one and the same.
The Buddhist word is nirvana.
The Hindu word is nirwana.
While the Buddhists tend to
give it a negative connotation,
the Hindus are a little more
positively affirmative on it.
>> Oh.
>> So as the Hindus stated more
on a positive basis as absolute
bliss, while the emphasis in the
Buddhistic tradition is that it
is the emptying of the universe.
The universe is not there,
nor is the individuality
of the person.
So neither the individual,
the so-called individual soul
is not there.
The person who aspires
for nirvana, when he
attains nirvana, is not there.
Then at the same time,
along with the person,
the individual, the universe
is a counterpart of his,
it's a counter opposite of his.
So the universe too, it
fizzles and disappears
at the time of nirvana.
So at the state in nirvana,
neither the universe
nor the individual
is there, but a state
of beingness which is
beyond these two is there.
And that's all that is
mentioned or indicated
in the Buddhistic tradition.
While in the Hindu
tradition, it's a little more
positively affirmed
and stated that nirvana
is the state of absolute
existence, absolute knowledge
consciousness, and
absolute bliss.
>> So something one
would want to attain.
>> Certainly.
>> And I asked you if there are
any shortcuts to enlightenment
and nirvana and
bliss, or techniques.
I was being a little silly.
>> Well, there are shortcuts
and there are no shortcuts.
In fact, the shortest cut
is to keep quiet, be still,
and know thyself.
So if you can be mentally
silent, mentally quiet,
that state of quietness
we lead you to nirvana.
That is to say, when
all the agitations
of the mind and the agitations
of the heart subside, then one
enters nirvana.
So that is a short way--
to keep quiet.
>> So one must then
find that quiet place.
>> Yes.
Quietness within oneself.
And if we hear that chatter.
Is it just a matter
of practicing?
Can you get better at it?
Do you need to just have
intention and put your energy
to that?
>> That's right.
We must consciously
make an effort
to put a stop to
our mental chatter
and to get into a
meditative state.
In a meditative
state, you become
acutely or consciously
aware of the truth of life,
which is there within you.
>> Now, just very briefly,
we have a few minutes left.
As a swami, you
are a vegetarian.
>> Yes.
>> You said you don't need
to do all the Hatha yoga.
>> Oh, not at all, not at
all because spiritual life is
primarily a mind science.
And it deals with the
mind, go beyond the mind.
>> But your exercise,
you love to walk.
Just because you love to walk?
>> Yes.
And it's good for the
body and the mind too.
>> Now as far as the robe,
everything you have on is
in the shades of the orange.
Tell me about that.
>> Yes, the orange
is the color of fire.
And fire purifies.
So it's symbolic.
>> So the symbolism then.
And so everything
then in the orange
gives you that
reminder to yourself.
>> That's right.
>> And as you travel now, you
will leave us and you will go
home to Sri Lanka on
your way home to India.
>> Yes, in fact, I'll be passing
through Colombo on my way
to India to the Himalayan
mountains where I live.
>> And when you are there, then
you'll be able to come back
from society into
your quiet place.
Is it easier to be
quiet in the Himalayas?
>> Yes, because it's easier to
be quiet there because we have
no activity, at least some of
us don't have any activity.
And therefore it's
very conducive
not to be involved with society.
But to be by oneself is very
desirable in the long run
to get into nirvana.
>> Yes.
But we are very
pleased that you do
leave India annually
or every other year
and come to share your
wisdom and your light.
Thank you.
If you would like to
be in touch with Swami,
there is a telephone
number here in the States
that you can connect with.
And we would love to hear from
you at Shakhi-Hill Production.
So stay tuned.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In studying the great
religions of the world,
it is really a
gift to have those
who have dedicated their
lives to an understanding
of the knowledge and the
wisdom come and share
their light with us.
We are so pleased to
have had the Swami
Yogeshwarananda with us.
And we are so glad that you
were there as our audience.
Until next time, I'm
Georgia Shakti-Hill.
May you'll be well,
happy, and peaceful.
[MUSIC PLAYING]